# EnCIFer User Guide & Tutorials

2022.3 CSD Release

Copyright © 2022 Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre

Registered Charity No 800579

## Conditions of Use

EnCIFer and associated documentation and command procedures (the
“Program”) is a copyright work belonging to the Cambridge
Crystallographic Data Centre (“CCDC”) and all rights are protected. Use
of the Program is permitted solely in accordance with the download
licence and all programs included are proprietary. All persons using the
Program should make themselves aware of the conditions contained in the
download licence. A copy of this can be found at:

[www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/Community/csd-community/EnCIFer/](http://www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/free_services/encifer/downloads/enCIFer_1.3)

In particular:

- The Program is to be treated as confidential and may NOT be
    disclosed or re-distributed in any form, in whole or in part, to any
    third party.

- The Program may be used for internal research, development or
    teaching purposes only.

- No representations, warranties, or liabilities are expressed or
    implied in the supply of the Program by CCDC, its servants or
    agents, except where such exclusion or limitation is prohibited,
    void or unenforceable under governing law.

All rights reserved

Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre

12 Union Road

Cambridge CB2 1EZ

United Kingdom

Web: www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk

Telephone: +44-1223-336408

Email: admin@ccdc.cam.ac.uk

## Contacting User Support

If you have any technical or scientific queries concerning this CCDC
product, please contact User Support who will try to help.

Email: support@ccdc.cam.ac.uk

Website: www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/support

Telephone: +44-1223-336022

A list of frequently asked questions (FAQs) is available at the website
address given above. This resource is continually being updated with
answers to common questions. Please scan the archive for the relevant
product before making use of our email and telephone support service.

If you need to contact User Support, please try to provide the following
information:

- The name and version number of the product with which you are having
    problems.

- The make, model and operating system of the workstation you are
    using.

- A clear description of the problem and the circumstances under which
    it occurred.

Also be prepared to email error messages, input files and other output.
This information is always useful when trying to determine the cause of
a problem.

We try to deal with User Support queries within one working day but
sometimes problems can take longer to solve. When this happens, we will
keep you informed of our progress and try to provide you with an answer
as quickly as possible.

If you are a licensed user of the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) we
will try to deal with your User Support query on the working day that it
arrives. However, problems can sometimes take longer to solve. When this
happens, we will keep you informed of our progress and try to provide
you with an answer as quickly as possible.

If you downloaded EnCIFer but are not a user of the CSD itself, we will
still try to help but will have to give priority to CSD users.
